---
layout: blog
title: "Designing Pasta for Spotify"
description: "A decent explanation of many of the choices I made while designing my unofficial Spotify client, Pasta for Spotify."
project: "fennifith/Pasta-for-Spotify"
---

For those that don’t know, Pasta for Spotify is a Spotify client that I made a while ago using the Spotify API and a couple libraries. I’m still a bit sore over it being removed from the Play Store because ‘the icon looked too similar to the official Spotify icon’ (see below image). Granted, I can see someone potentially mistaking the app for an official one if the app somehow got a couple million more downloads, but it did say ‘unofficial Spotify client’ in about three places in the description and in the app itself, so I doubt it would take anyone long to realize the difference. Either way, I still use the app myself (almost every day) since it’s faster and in my opinion better than the official client, so my almost four months of working on it seems to be paying off.

The app currently only works with premium accounts (the Spotify API won’t play music on a free account, although it can still fetch albums and playlists), and it has several small issues like not being to play something that’s more than 100 items down a list, however for the most part it works well, and has only one or two features (playlist radios being one of them) missing.

Just to clarify, it was made by a group of people, not just me. Even though I ended up with the largest amount of contributions (probably because of my horrible coding style at the time), [Jan-Lk Else](https://android.jlelse.eu/@jlelse), [Patrick J](http://pddstudio.com/), and [Alexandre Piveteau](https://github.com/alexandrepiveteau) helped a great deal with developing the app, [Vukašin Anđelković](https://vukash.in/) made me beautiful buttery icons, and [Kevin Aguilar](https://dribbble.com/kevttob) helped sort out a few random UI problems. So you can imagine my annoyance when I woke up and opened the group chat to see that the app (still in beta) had been suspended. I did try to submit an appeal, which ended up getting approved on the condition that I change the app icon (which I unwillingly did), then the app was re-suspended within 12 hours after being republished. So basically, I’m done trying. The explanations I got were extremely wordy and it was difficult to understand exactly what was wrong with the app the second time, so I’m moving on for now.

Getting back to how the app was made, the [project website](/projects/pasta-for-spotify) goes over much of the app’s design, but doesn’t really say why I made some of the choices I did. So I’m writing this. Hopefully someone finds it useful — it will at least give me something to look back upon in a few years time.

The app has quite a few customization options — the main app colors can be changed, along with whether to use cards, tiles, or lists in a few places, and there are a few other options like whether to show thumbnails, and how many search results to load. One thing that stays the same, however, are the increased touch areas compared to the official app. This makes it much harder to accidentally click the wrong item. The app also uses gesture-based navigation in many places for the same reason. Tabs are used to separate groups of items, and the now playing screen can be closed by swiping down.

The home screen of the app has two tabs: new releases and featured playlists. These are shown at the front of the app mainly because they’re the parts I use the most. Albums in the new release section have two parts: the artist, which when clicked takes you to the artist screen, and the actual album, which takes up a significantly larger amount of space.

Clicking on an album opens a list of the tracks inside, along with the expanded album art and the artists in it shown as ‘chips’ at the top. The playlist screen is almost exactly the same, with the only difference being the addition of a menu item if the user can edit the playlist.

Another menu item on these screens is the favorite button, which I can proudly say does not work differently. In Spotify, saving an item for later seems to be a little more confusing than it needs to be. Playlists and artists can both be followed or unfollowed, while albums and songs can be saved to a place called ‘your music’. While I can understand the need for a difference between the two, as playlists and artists can both be modified while albums and songs are final, what Spotify has done confused me for quite a while. The ‘add to your music’ button on the now playing screen was a simple ‘+’ icon that changed to a check mark when clicked. Without googling anything, to a normal user it wouldn’t be really obvious what its function was. In Pasta for Spotify, all of these have been replaced with a nice simple understandable favorite icon. And a favorites section.

When a song is selected, it opens the now playing screen as soon as it starts playing. This screen is pretty hard to do anything wrong with, and there are little extra features added in order to keep interactions with it simple enough for it to be understandable on the first use of the app. The functions of the play/pause, next, and previous buttons are somewhat obvious. Swiping up on the bottom section opens a list of the currently playing songs, and clicking on one switches to that song.

The order of tracks in a playlist can be changed from a dialog accessible from the album/playlist menus, and contain mostly standard options (date added, name, artist, duration, etc). One thing to note is the ‘randomized’ option. This is essentially the same thing as the ‘shuffle’ option in Spotify, except instead of being on the now playing screen, it has been moved to the same place as the other sorting options. Since they all become obsolete if shuffle is enabled, it makes sense to show them in the same place. This also eliminates confusion and prevents some possible issues that could occur. Say, for example, you order a playlist by artist name. You want to play all the songs in that playlist by a certain artist, but you left shuffle on by mistake. Then you get very confused because it’s not playing the song you thought it would.

The final touch, when navigating around the rest of the app while a song is playing, a playbar appears just above the navigation bar. This provides the option to play/pause or skip to the next song, see what’s playing, and see how much of the song is left. If the user finds it unnecessary, it can be swiped downwards to hide it until the song changes.

That's it for my design choices! The app isn't published on Google Play anymore, but you can grab an APK from [here](/projects/pasta-for-spotify) or the [GitHub releases](/redirects/?t=github&d=/Pasta-for-Spotify/releases).
